Welcome! I this video, Writing to the Console,
what are we going to do? Well we're going to learn how to write, funnily
enough, to this area here, which is called the Console, and we're going to
do that by learning a little bit about the anatomy of these program lines
and what it is that makes them tick. What is it that
hooks them up to the actors in Unity and
makes them print to the Console? So that's very exciting stuff, it's going to be your first program
ever, for some of you, so let's dive right in!
So we saw this file briefly at the end of the last video. All I've done since is
clean up by closing a few of these tabs around the edges, to give us more
space to look at this lovely file. And I'd
like to draw your attention to a couple of bits. Well, first off, it
is quite complicated, so we're not going to chew all of this at once, we're
going to tackle it one bit at a time. And the bit I want to draw your attention to
is where it says Start () and this whole block here, from
this curly brace to the end curly brace. This is where we're going to put our code
to run once at the startup. So this tells the
actor that, when we start we want to do the following, very very
simple. So what do we want to do? Well we want to print, so what I'm going to
do is create a print command in
here between these two curly braces. A print command looks just like this, it's print.
Then, the question is, what do I print? So we have to tell it what to print
and that goes between curly brackets like this...
Not curly brackets, sorry, round brackets like this. And then,
what we want to print is some text, and in
Unity speak, in fact in programming speak full stop, text is known as a
string. So I'm going to be calling it a string from now on, but
you may want to think of it as text
and text has to go between these two
double quotes. So what we can say is, "Hello
World!"), and I'm going to put an exclamation mark at
the end of that. And, as you see,
it's very important that the brackets and the quotes are correct, because, like I said,
this actor is very stupid, and if you do anything like
getting these order wrong, like this, he won't be able to understand it,
so we need to make sure that the quotes are inside the brackets.
And then, one more thing, you'll notice that the IDE is
already pointing out a little error for us with this red squiggly line, it's like
spelling correction but for your code, and for the stupid actor, it's
telling us what the stupid actor won't be able to understand. And in this case, it's saying it
expected a semicolon. So why did it need a semicolon? Well that's because
the actor needs to know when he's finished doing this particular instruction and
when he should move on to do the next one. So let's run through the anatomy one more
time! We have a command to the actor, which is print. We then
have brackets, which tell us that we're about to give some
information about what to print. Then, we have
a quote, which tells us that the thing we're about to print is a string, also
known as text, and then, inside we have the text,
then we say we're finished with the string, and then, we say we're finished
with the things that we want to print and then we say we're
finished with this whole command, this whole action. So
that is how the actor is going to go about reading and
executing this action, and the whole thing is within these Start ()
curly brackets, which means... Whoops, I don't want to do that.
The whole thing is within the Start () with curly brackets, which means that
it is done when the game starts. So I'm going to save this
file. And then, how do we get it to run? Well we need
an actor to run our script, so let me talk a little bit about that.
So we've got scripts, and in Unity speak, these are known as
Components. I'll get you used to that terminology early on, because we'll be using it
throughout the course. And then, we have our stupid actor,
which in Unity speak is known as a Game Object, and
it's obviously a Game Object, because it is an object in the game and the Components
are parts of its behavior. In fact, I say parts because you could
have multiple scripts or multiple components,
each of which is a different part of that particular actor's behavior, and we'll
see that in later sections but, in this section, we won't need it just yet.
So what do we understand from that? Well we need
our scripts to be attached to an actor or
GameObject, so our script which is a Component needs to be attached
to a GameObject. Now the GameObjects all live in
the Hierarchy or in the scene, so we need to right-click
in the Hierarchy to create a new GameObject and go down to Create
Empty. Now I can rename this GameObject by going over to the
Inspector and changing where it says this default name of GameObject.
I'm going to change this to ConsolePrinter
and GO for GameObject, for short. Now remember you have
to hit Enter, in order to rename this, I always fall [Laughs] for that one, and then,
we need to attach a script. How do we do that? Well quite simple, we can either
drag onto the object in the Hierarchy or we drag onto
the object in the Inspector. Either one will do the same thing, it will just list
the script or Component in our Inspector.
So there we go, we know that the ConsolePrinter script has now been
attached to our ConsolePrinter GameObject!
So we can save our scene by Control saving, and hit
play. Now you'll notice, if we go over to the Console, that
we've got a "Hello World!" printed! Excellent! Now
just to show you that this script indeed needed to be attached to the GameObject, we can
remove it again. So we click on the cog, hit Remove
Component, and then, hit play.
Go over to the Console and notice nothing is being printed. So
congratulations, we have printed our first line
out of a script. Now what I want to show you is a
very common error that people often make. When you right-click and
Create and create a C# Script, it will create a new behavior with this default name.
Now if you don't rename, at this point, say you click away, for example, then you come back
to rename what will happen is something very interesting.
I'm going to rename this to Test
Script. And if I wanted to
attach this to our ConsolePrinter GameObject or our Console Printer actor
I can do that by dragging, but you'll notice that Unity gives us an error
and the error actually gives us a clue as to what's going on. Have a little think, what do you
think it could be? OK, you may not have got it
but I will tell you. It is actually...
And ignore that. It's actually that
this class has to be the same as
this .cs script. Oops, I opened in chrome
by accident. Let's open that test script.
So you'll notice that TestScript.cs
is not the same as NewBehaviorScript. You'll notice that this comes
after class, that's how you know what I'm talking about. So what we need to do is
also rename this to match. We can save that file,
go over to Unity, drag it onto the ConsolePrinterGO,
and click on the GO Object, and we'll see that,
there you go, indeed that component has been added on to the GameObject.
So let's Remove it, because we don't want that. We can delete it with right-
click, Delete, and
move our Console... Oops, I don't want to move the whole tab!
I want to move this Console script onto the Game
ConsolePrinterGO and play again to check
that everything's still as it should be. Yep, my Console is still printing
"Hello World!". So that's a little primer
on GameObjects and Components and how they relate to each other. And in actual
fact, they're just fancy words for Actors and Scripts, so you can think of it in that way,
too. We also have just looked at how we can look at the
ConsolePrinter to print this ("Hello World"). So that is
all fabulous! Now it's time for
a challenge! I'd like you to write a game intro to our Go Home
game. I'd like you to print your own print statement. And can you
write multiple lines? How would you give multiple instructions to
your actor? And then, share a screenshot, both of the code
and of this little bit, the
Console, in the discussions. OK, so
pause the video and test out your knowledge.
OK welcome back!
So you have presumably had a go at this. Now
you may have guessed it but the way of printing two lines is
simply like so, but
this is not very neat. We often, in programming, have
lots of conventions which aren't strictly necessary, such as, you notice that when I
added the semicolon, this print line automatically had
these tabs inserted before it. But it would equally
well just work if all of these white spaces were removed and it just
looked like this, but it's really ugly and really hard for humans to read,
not the actors, not the stupid actors, they just go and read character by character
but us humans, we would struggle with this. So what we often
do is we make sure that each command, each statement,
is written on its own line, like so.
And I don't forget my semicolon, on the end of the line, and go over to
Unity and let's hit play! There we go, we've got
"Hello World!" and "Hello2"! Brilliant!
So how do we introduce people
to the game? Well let's say
("Welcome to Go Home!"), and then, on the second
line we can say ("A game
where you need to find your way back.")
like so. Let's just test that out!
We'll get used to this cycle of writing code and going back
into Unity and hitting play and watching our changes. Here we go!
"Welcome to Go Home!" "A game where you need to find your way back."
So how do we take a screenshot of this?
We take our Snipping Tool on Windows, on Mac it's
slightly different. We can create a New Snip and
then just select the bit of the screen that's relevant, like so.
And then, you can save this file to your Desktop or wherever and
follow the discussions link for this lecture, and either create a new topic
or just add in to the sharing post that is already there, where lots of people have been
sharing their first experiences of writing to the Console. And go and
congratulate other students, get involved and really share in the
joy of your achievements. Congratulations, pat yourselves on the back! When you are
happy with this, continue on to the next video! See you there!